A Map is worth a Thousand Data: Requirements in Tertiary Human-Data Interaction to Foster Participation 


Angela Locoro 
Dipartimento di Informatica, Sistemistica e Comunicazione, Università degli Studi di Milano Bicocca, Viale Sarca 336, 20126 Milano 


Abstract. 
                This paper aims to shed light on an emerging class of phenomena that are related to the abundance of data, which either come from personal life records or from open data portals, and to the strategies to tame this abundance to enable the human making of sense and decision. In particular, a new category can be introduced for these kind of data, which are neither primary (that is being deeply engrained into a work practice), nor secondary (i.e., processed by and for specialists, like the members of clerical, managerial or research staff) but, in a way, “tertiary”, as they are consumed (when not directly produced) by “final customers”. Hence, new ways of engaging users to either enable or facilitate the direct comprehension, and the ad-hoc manipulation and tailoring of data to unpredictable and unstructured tasks should be devised, also by means of more active and inter-active visualization techniques, in order to reduce the information overload and to let users shape their data landscapes in a virtuos cycle that may also return benefit to the same (primary) production and uses of data. In so doing, both data can partake in the end-users lives and these latter partake in improving the quality of data in face of the current (open) big data tide. 


Keywords: tertiary data, human-data interaction, data visualization, mapping data. 


1 Introducing tertiary human-data interaction 
Information is one of the most abundant resources that are available in our society. This is thanks to the multiple sources of data that we can get access to and the multiple means by which we can interpret them. However, when data come in big quantities, so that also the phenomenon of information overload can be detected, then real life interaction with those data to reach their informative gist can become a daunting task. It is frequent the case in which data are just too many, loosely structured, highly redundant and complex [2]. In order to generate order and meaning out of them, people usually have to also rely on visual aids, annotations, and context, to mention only a few of the well-known affordances for data interpretation [3],[4]. 
In this paper, we introduce the expression “Human-Data Interaction” (HDI) denoted as “the human manipulation, analysis, and sense making of large, unstructured, and complex datasets” [5]. In so doing, we can address the “different nature and dynamics of HDI” with respect to the traditional and bi-directional stances of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), and we can drawn a distinction between data elaborated for specific tasks and with specific goals, and the massive amount of information published “out there”, without knowing or worrying about how they will be accessed, interpreted and exploited by disparate people to widely different aims. A new class of problems emerges within this complex ecosystem of personal and open data, which “could greatly benefit from novel and intuitive data aggregation, summarization, analytics and visualization techniques” [5]. 
As a first step of our work, we would like to extend the concept of HDI by enriching it through a tripartite distinction. We distinguish between primary data (and primary human-data interaction), which come from a broad range of sources and are produced both within a practice and for its orderly unfolding; the main characteristics of primary data is to be entangled with the practices of a community (of practice) and therefore not easily detachable from their context of creation, manipulation and use. We call derivative data [1], what is produced from the primary data for other aims than those related to the original practices of data production and use. Within this very broad class of derivative data, we distinguish between secondary data and tertiary data. Accordingly, a distinction is made between activities pertaining to secondary human-data interaction, on one hand, and to tertiary human-data interaction, on the other hand. The former ones encompass the processes by which clerical, managerial and research staff make sense of primary data, often by also processing them to make them more suitable to their professional-oriented (and even sometime biased) interpretation, by representing data in suitable formats, i.e., typically tabular data at various level of aggregation with respect to primary data. Tertiary human-data interaction encompasses activities that mostly pertain to the use of data from social categories of people such as policy-makers, final users, tax-payers and citizens, broadly speaking. Most of these data users do not share the same purposes and, most notably, the same capabilities of other categories of professionals in dealing with “their data”. 
An analogy from the agriculture domain may be drawn for the sake of clarity to illustrate our intended tripartition of data and interaction-with-data: primary data are like the produce of the land, which farmers grow for themselves as well as the external market, in terms of “raw” material. Secondary data are the product of a transformation of these primary raw data, like the one going on in food industry where vegetables are cleansed, chopped, and, after a precise categorization and selection, properly wrapped. Tertiary data are further and possibly (tough not necessarily) transformed from secondary data to make them easily consumable and valuable, that is conveyed to a broader population of consumers in terms of information services, like fresh-cut vegetable products can be seen as the tangible service to have vegetables already ready-to-eat or ready-to-cook. This latter distinction is particularly useful in order to frame the interaction-with-tertiary-data problem with a problem of active users participation to the process of managing such data according to a collective and perhaps data-community orientation.