Stories from Survivors: Privacy & Security Practices when Coping with Intimate Partner Abuse
 Tara Matthews, Kathleen O’Leary, Anna Turner, Manya Sleeper, Jill Palzkill Woelfer,

 Martin Shelton, Cori Manthorne*, Elizabeth F. Churchill, Sunny Consolvo
 Google, Mountain View, CA, USA, taramatthews@google.com, katieole@gmail.com, {annaturn, manya, jillwoelfer, martinshelton}@google.com, churchill@acm.org, sconsolvo@google.com
*Community Overcoming Relationship Abuse, San Mateo, CA, USA
corim@corasupport.org

 ABSTRACT

 We present a qualitative study of the digital privacy and security motivations, practices, and challenges of survivors of intimate partner abuse (IPA). This paper provides a framework for organizing survivors' technology practices and challenges into three phases: physical control, escape, and life apart. This three-phase framework combines technology practices with three phases of abuse to provide an empirically sound method for technology creators to consider how survivors of IPA can leverage new and existing technologies. Overall, our results suggest that the usability of and control over privacy and security functions should be or continue to be high priorities for technology creators seeking ways to better support survivors of IPA.

 Author Keywords

 Privacy; security; user study; intimate partner abuse; domestic violence.

 ACM Classification Keywords

 H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.

 INTRODUCTION 
With the prominence and pervasiveness of technology in our lives, technology users have reason to attend to their digital privacy and security. Much personal information is collected and stored in online accounts: location in order to power navigation or fitness apps, photos on social media, personal communications in messaging and email apps, and so on. Privacy and security features can help protect users’ data from malicious third parties. But for many technology users, the potential actions of an ill-intentioned third party seem an unlikely concern.

 Some technology users, however, may already be specifically targeted by ill-intentioned third parties. These user populations may include survivors of abuse or human trafficking, political activists, online celebrities, displaced persons, people of low socioeconomic status, and so on. Such users may be specifically targeted because of what they do, who they are, where they are, or who they are with.

 While considerable research has focused on digital privacy and security for the majority of users, less has focused on users who, as a result of their particular life circumstances, may be specific targets of ill-intentioned third parties. Understanding the unique digital privacy and security experiences and challenges of such user populations is important for designers who wish to help them better navigate and deploy privacy and security controls online and on their devices. Furthermore, understanding the unique challenges of specific populations can help designers improve technology for both that specific population and the broader population [17].

 We present a study of the digital privacy and security motivations, practices, and challenges of a specific population facing higher levels of risk in their daily lives: survivors of intimate partner abuse (IPA). These are people who are broadly targeted by an intimate partner, typically a current or former significant other or dating partner. They may experience threats or actual abuse from their abuser, including sexual, physical, and psychological abuse; stalking; and control of reproductive or sexual health [6]. They may also be controlled financially or spiritually. The abuse can be one-way or mutual and it can take place along a continuum from a single incident to ongoing abuse [6]. Survivors of IPA have a persistent attacker, who has intimate knowledge of their lives. When they share custody of children, a survivor may be legally bound to maintain contact with their persistent attacker, even if they no longer live together.

 IPA is common: an estimated 27.3% of women and 11.5% of men in the U.S. have experienced negative impacts from sexual violence, physical violence, or stalking by an intimate partner [6]; about 30% of women worldwide who have been in a relationship have experienced physical or sexual violence by an intimate partner [44]. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that in the U.S., nearly 27 million women and nearly 16 million men have experienced severe physical violence by an intimate partner at some point in their lifetime [6]. Because IPA affects so many people across the U.S. and the world, survivors and abusers may vary in gender, culture, wealth, education, tech literacy, and other attributes. Survivors of IPA would likely benefit from designers and technologists who understand their specific digital privacy and security needs. In our study, we focused on women and men living in the U.S., of low socioeconomic (SES) status and tech literacy, accepting housing and/or services at a non-profit IPA or homeless shelter. While our study results are not representative of all who experience IPA or of all populations of users in higher risk situations, it is a step in moving beyond the majority of general users in usable privacy and security research.

 We conducted one-hour long, semi-structured interviews with 15 survivors of IPA who were receiving services at non-profit organizations in the U.S. Our study sought to answer the following research questions:

 • What role has digital privacy and security played in the experiences that survivors of IPA have with their abusers?
 • What are IPA survivors’ motivations, practices, and challenges when protecting their privacy and security online and on their devices?
 • What technology design implications do the digital privacy and security challenges faced by survivors of IPA suggest?

 Results of the study were used to develop a framework organizing survivor technology practices and challenges into three-phases of intimate partner abuse: physical control, escape, and life apart. In the physical control phase, survivors wanted private access to devices and accounts to maintain social support and autonomy, which the abuser physically tried to limit and control. In the escape phase, which overlapped with both physical control and life apart, survivors faced the challenge of hiding digital escape activities (before leaving their abuser) and severing digital ties with their abuser (after leaving). In the life apart phase, survivors faced the challenge of preventing abusers from using digital means to find their new contact information and location. This framework provides an empirically sound method for technology creators to consider how new and existing technologies may be designed to better help survivors of IPA. The accompanying stories from survivors of IPA add nuance and render visible that they face different and complicated digital privacy and security challenges.

 RELATED WORK

 Here we outline prior research on the usability of privacy and security technologies, frameworks of IPA, technology use by abusers and survivors, and digital IPA interventions.

 Usability of Privacy and Security Technologies

 Prior research has demonstrated repeatedly that designing for privacy and security concerns is notoriously complex, many aspects of which remain highly challenging despite considerable research effort. For example, prior studies have shown that it can be difficult for users to understand the complexities of online security [26,43], Wi-Fi security [11], social media sharing mechanisms [24], and more. Thus, users sometimes adopt usage strategies with suboptimal privacy and security outcomes [26,30,43]. Taking into account these challenges, prior work has focused on improving the usability of general online privacy and security technologies [1,13,14,22,27,38]. We explore similar issues, but contribute by focusing on a specific population: survivors of IPA. Survivors are often under extraordinary stress due to their life circumstances, which may make it even more difficult for them to pay attention to the complexities of managing their digital privacy and security.

 Frameworks of Intimate Partner Abuse

 Survivors of IPA often find it hard and dangerous to leave their abusers [7,20,37]. Prior work from a range of fields has outlined frameworks for considering cycles and phases of IPA. According to Walker [42], survivors experience three phases of abuse: the tension building phase, then the acute battering phase of violence, and then the honeymoon phase during which the abuser tries to convince the survivor the abuse has ended. Walker [42], and more recent definitions of IPA from the CDC [6], include not only physical abuse but also psychological and emotional abuse, and other forms of controlling behavior.

 Others have expanded Walker’s work to include leaving and post-separation [3]. Much of this literature has focused on leaving, defined as the process of ending the abusive relationship, which can take weeks or years [37]. For example, Patton [37] described five phases of leaving: pre-contemplation, contemplation, deciding to leave, actually leaving, and establishing a new violence-free life. Leaving is influenced by turning points, or events that prompt survivors to consider escaping from their abusers [8,37], such as increased violence from abusers, life events, and changes in life-stage or beliefs [8,15,31,37,48]. For turning points to occur, and for survivors to maintain their lives after physically leaving their abuser, survivors need access to a variety of resources that may provide pathways out of abuse, including institutional support and access to information [37]. Survivors face barriers to leaving, such as fear of harm and dependence on abusers for necessities

 When survivors take steps to leave, abusers tend to significantly increase their attempts to regain control [20,46], and failed attempts to leave can result in increased severity of violence and even death [7]. Wuest and Merrit-Gray [32,47,48] studied the time after actually leaving an abuser physically, dividing it into three phases: breaking free, not going back, and moving on, during which survivors faced different challenges in establishing their new violence-free lives, such as recovering emotionally and building new relationships.

 Abusers’ Uses of Technology

 Abusers may use technology to track their victim’s movements, or to maintain financial or psychological control. Abusers may draw on a variety of data types to track or locate survivors, including GPS, phone records, online databases, social media, hidden cameras, and spyware [20,34,40]. This can lead survivors to feel that they are “constantly under surveillance,” which can increase the difficulty of leaving [45]. This tracking takes place in the context of a current or past relationship, meaning that— similar to the “insider threat” model in organizational contexts [21]—the abuser typically has intimate knowledge of and access to the survivor. This dynamic may result in increased psychological distress and violence [28]. Abusers may also use different forms of electronic communication to contact, harass, or humiliate survivors, either directly or through third parties. Abusers may try to isolate survivors by blocking access to online communication or by preventing survivors from accessing financial or other online accounts [34,45].

 Survivors’ Uses of Technology

 The National Network to End Domestic Violence (NNEDV) has published a variety of technology-use guidelines for survivors of IPA and agencies who support them, based on extensive experience working to help this population. These guidelines cover topics including mobile phones, browsers, and social media [35].

 However, survivors of IPA face considerable online privacy and security challenges. Massimi et al. [29] refer to the “complicated privacy work” survivors encounter after escaping their abusers. Survivors may rely on the same technologies abusers use to harass or find them, to help re-establish support and resources, or to document evidence of abuse [2,16,20,29]. Survivors may draw on a variety of online privacy practices, including using new devices, sharing anonymously or creating aliases, or limiting their use of online tools or sharing [2,16].

 IPA-Specific Technology Interventions

 Some researchers have proposed specific technology interventions to help counter the challenges and threats faced by survivors of IPA. For example, Arief et al. [5] suggest that when designing technology with the primary goal of supporting survivors, designers should take into account usability and the survivors’ privacy, as well as the possibility that abusers will appropriate such technologies. Using these suggestions, they propose an app specially designed to delete evidence of the survivor’s help-seeking activities, while preserving evidence of abusers’ misuse of the survivors’ devices. Other tools, such as Safe Chat Silicon Valley [49] and the NNEDV’s Tech Safety app [35], focus on providing fast access to resources. The NNEDV’s Tech Safety app [35] provides recommendations to survivors involving a variety of widely available privacy and security features, such as private browsing, privacy settings on social media, 2-factor authentication, and more. Another class of tools focus on allowing survivors to disguise their browsing [19]. Still other tools try to help survivors protect their physical safety. The GuardDV tool, for example, attempts to alert homeless IPA survivors when their abusers are nearby [25]. As an alternative approach, Clarke et al. [10] used technology-grounded processes to explore photo-sharing as a method of supporting survivors.

 Combining Technology Use & Phases of IPA

 We build upon prior work by developing a three-phase framework focused on the needs of the HCI community. Our framework aligns with prior work oriented to the needs of non-technology focused audiences, but does not replicate prior frameworks. For example, our first phase, physical control, includes the time prior to actually leaving from Patton [37] and prior to breaking free from Merrit-Gray and Wuest [32,48]. Our second phase, escape, begins with Patton’s deciding to leave phase [37], and ends approximately after Merrit -Gray and Wuest’s not going back phase [48]. Our third phase, life apart, begins at the point of physical separation, after actually leaving [37] or breaking free [32,48] are initiated. Our framework provides two novel contributions. First, it combines technology practices with the phases of IPA, which allows design to be considered in the context of phases. Second, although our framework was inspired by phases found in other fields, our analysis adapts them to align with the affordances of contemporary and emerging technology.

 METHOD

 We conducted semi-structured interviews with 15 survivors of IPA. Also as part of this research, we performed a thorough ethics review to inform our methods and reporting. We consulted the literature and over a dozen experts in domains including survivors of IPA, human subjects research, legal, ethics, security, privacy, and anonymization. Here we describe participants and recruiting, procedures, data collected, participant and researcher wellbeing, analysis, anonymization, and ethical considerations in reporting this research.

 Agency Collaboration, Recruiting & Participants

 Participants were survivors of IPA (14 female, 1 male), receiving services at multiple shelters run by two non-profit organizations in the U.S., which we refer to as “the agencies.” The agencies served homeless adults and survivors of IPA. We worked with agency staff to co-create a study proposal and asked for advice, such as communication style, dress, location of the sessions, incentives, any follow-up that might be needed after study sessions (i.e., after care), and the gender balance of our interviewers. Once the study plan was final, agency staff recruited participants through personal contact according to criteria we specified. Specifically, participants needed to be at least 18 years of age and have an online privacy or security concern, such as experiencing an account breach. As a privacy precaution, we did not collect demographic information from participants aside from gender. Prior to sessions, agency staff distributed a copy of our consent materials to potential participants, identifying the affiliation of the researchers, and providing them an opportunity to decline participation prior to any contact with us.

 Participant & Researcher Wellbeing

 We worked closely with the agencies to understand the specific sensitivities of working with their clients. To protect our participants, we met participants in-person, at agency locations where they received services and felt safe. Participants at the IPA agency were told an advocate could join them in the interview if desired; none of the participants chose to bring an advocate. We made plans with the agencies to communicate with them if anything problematic came up during interviews (such as someone revealing that they were considering self-harm in the future), and to inform participants of this after care arrangement.

 Participant wellbeing shaped our study design. We sought to protect participants from undue harm from recalling painful memories, while balancing our research goals of understanding participants’ experiences of online privacy and security practices and challenges. To accomplish this, we used semi-structured interviews designed to elicit stories about technology-related abuse. We intentionally omitted questions that would potentially elicit general stories related to trauma and abuse unrelated to technology. Prior work has also described the need to consider potential emotional harm to researchers [18,33]. One of the shelter directors offered to debrief the interviewer and note taker after the interviews to help process emotional responses to hearing about IPA.

 Procedures & Data Collected

 Sessions with survivors lasted 31-67 minutes, (µ=48). With the participants’ permission, sessions were audio recorded and the resulting 14.45 hours of audio recordings were transcribed, resulting in 709 pages. (One survivor declined recording, but detailed notes were taken and analyzed with permission.) Transcripts were labeled with a pseudonym (P1, P2, etc.) and personally identifiable information within the transcripts were anonymized. Two researchers attended each session: one led the interview; the other took notes and asked occasional follow up questions. All interviews were led by the same researcher (a female); three different note-takers attended different interviews (2 females, 1 male).

 We began sessions by going over the consent documents with participants, which gave permission for publication of aggregated or anonymized information. All participants gave informed consent and received a $100 gift card at the beginning of their session; the incentive amount was approved by the agencies and our organization’s internal ethics review. For the remainder of the session, we used an experience-centered approach, focusing on participant experiences with technology and online privacy and security [17]. It consisted of a 5-question “ice breaker” survey about device and account use, a semi-structured interview about experiences related to digital privacy and security, and a card sort about their privacy and security practices. In this paper, we focus on results from the semi-structured interviews.

 The interviews began with two neutral questions about the participant’s use of technology, referencing a list of devices gathered from the ice breaker survey: (1) “Which of these devices is most important to you and why?” and (2) “Are any of these devices ever used by anyone else?” Two other questions formed the core of the interview: (3) “Can you tell me about a time when someone gained access to information about you that you did not want them to have?”; and (4) “Can you tell me about a time when someone else gained access to one of your accounts or devices? Or tried to?” To follow up on these stories, we used three questions: (a) “What happened as a result?” (b) “What did you do next?”; and (c) “How did this experience affect how you use technology?”

